Add PR review and merging guidelines for maintainers (#5191)
godotengine/godot-docs: community/contributing/pr_review_guidelines.rst

.. _doc_pr_review_guidelines:

Pull request review guidelines
==============================

.. note::
	This page is targeted at engine maintainers responsible for reviewing
	and approving pull requests. While not all tips and recommendations
	here are actionable if you are not a maintainer, this can still give
	you and insight into what goes into successfully merging a PR.

	Even if you are not a maintainer, you can always help by spotting
	issues in code or problems with the implementation overall, as well
	as by doing live testing of PRs on your machine and confirming that
	they work as intended.

> If you are a designated Godot contributor and maintainers, you've likely

Reviewer: Grammar issue, plus I'm not sure if we should list "contributor" here since that word can apply to hundreds of people. Maybe we should also make it clear what maintainers look like on GitHub.

```suggestion
If you are a designated Godot maintainer ("Member" on GitHub), you've likely
```

Reviewer 2: Fair, I'll amend with your suggestion.

demonstrated skill, knowledge and capacity for better judgement when
writing, reviewing and improving Godot engine code and experience. You
are entrusted with keeping Godot moving forward, so feel free to exercise
your maintainer power to achieve that.

One part of that power is reviewing and merging pull requests, created
by your teammates and other contributors. You may not even realize it,
but you have full control of that green "Merge" button and are encouraged

> to use it. But there are a few rules, checks and recommendations that you

Reviewer: Honestly I think we should put more emphasis on reviewing rather than merging. In an ideal world many reviews would come before a merge.

Reviewer 2: We basically have two problems here, and two articles combined into one. Both are important to address, and this is just the first draft. I can try to shift the emphasis, but I think this statement also sends the message that we wanted to send about having that power and being able to exercise it.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @pycbouh, ideally we would have a "how to review PRs" doc and a "how to merge PRs" doc.

need to keep in mind before proceeding to do that.

Now, some of the things stated below may look obvious, but this is not

> to insult your intelligent. We all can forget things, and we also come

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to insult your intelligence. We all can forget things, and we also come
```

focused on solving a particular issue and accidentally breaking something
unrelated.

As such, a reviewer needs to establish that at a glance nothing outside
of the PR target area was affected (at least, affected negatively). It
should be enough to start the editor with a project, clicking a couple
of buttons, and running a scene.

3. Test the improved functionality
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the rest of the engine and the editor only need a cursory look,
the areas directly affected by PR need to be evaluated more carefully.
Before going after the code it always makes sense to check if the
desired outcome is achieved in practice.

.. note::
	Some PRs can also aim to improve code that could theoretically cause a
	problem. Use your better judgement and experience there to assess the
	case, if it cannot be reproduced and tested in practice.

The precise approach would highly depend on the affected area of the
engine.

4. Do a code review
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While code reviews can be quite boring and tedious, we cannot avoid
them. Thankfully, some PRs are short and sweet, and can probably be
approved just from the code review alone, skipping steps 1 through 3.

> (Not recommended).

Reviewer 2: Yes, of course. "Not recommended" note implies that it was a bit of a jest. Like I've said on RC, I've tried to keep it light in tone. I can of course amend it, if that negatively impacts the sentiment of the point we are trying to make in this paragraph.

Although in practice you can sometimes see that there is an issue just from checking the code and the fix.

* **Code only touches the areas announced in the PR (and the commit
  message).**

  It is always tempting to start fixing random things in code, as you
  see them. However, this can quickly become a hell to dig through in
  the commit history. Small touch-ups next to the related area are
  alright, but often bugs that you can find along the way are better
  left for their own PRs.

* **Code properly uses Godot's own APIs and patterns.**

  This is true for any reasonably sized project — consistency is very
  important, and a solution that already exists in the codebase
  is preferable to an ad-hoc solution.

* **Are core areas affected by the change?**

  Sometimes a PR that is supposed to solve a local problem can have a
  far-reaching effect, way outside of its scope. If you believe that
  is the case, make sure to get senior maintainers involved in the
  process, namely `reduz <https://github.com/reduz>`_ or
  `vnen <https://github.com/vnen>`_. Their input and approval would
  be required for changes to the engine's core systems and overall
  architecture, APIs that touch on all Objects or Nodes, changes
  to GDScript and GDNative. If the pull request modifies the build

>   system, you can contact `Akien <https://github.com/akien-mga>`_.

Reviewer 4: Is hard-coding people into documentation a good idea? Maybe it could link to their teams instead?

Reviewer 2: They were mentioned by name in the notes. Well, reduz and vnen were. I've added akien himself as it seems appropriate.

The recommendation here is specifically for issues that go beyond the teams and need an approval from the leads personally.

5. Iterate with the contributor and improve the PR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inevitably, a lot of pull requests would be initially undercooked.
At this point, you and the contributor should enter a feedback loop
where they iterate on your notes, recommendations and requests, and
you look that they have indeed fixed the issues you've highlighted.

Try not to exhaust the contributor with style nitpicks, especially
if it's still up in the air whether their PR would be accepted at
all. Preferably, suggestions should come in order of importance:
first address their overall code design and approach to solving the
problem, then make sure their code is complying with the engine's

> best practices, and last do the "pretty pass".

Reviewer: The problem that I have with this suggestion is that the set of people who can make a decision about whether a PR is taking the right approach is different from and much smaller than the set of people who can give reviews with simple things such as style nitpicks. In such a case it's not clear whether to give small reviews or do nothing.

Reviewer 2: This is derived from the note from @akien-mga that we shouldn't exhaust contributors with code style nitpicks. Especially not before the feature overall has been approved. I myself sometimes open an issue a leave a comment about something mundane because I notice it, but don't do a proper review overall. This may actually hurt the process, as others may expect me to continue with a proper review, and the contributor may think that they don't have other problems since I am paying attention to the small stuff.

In the end, I don't think there is a clear "do" or "don't" here. The word "Preferably" points to it being a suggestion and not a rule too.

A merger is just a reviewer in fancy pants. All recommendations
above still apply if you aim to merge a pull request, but you
can also completely rely on your fellow maintainers and their
judgement. Naturally, there is little point in doing a full review
yourself if you see your team members approving the changes.

But there are still more things that need to be checked before a
PR can be merged.

1. Get feedback from multiple people/teams
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Try not to merge things based on one review alone, especially
your own. Get a second opinion from your teammates, and make
sure all the teams have been reasonably represented by the
reviewers. For example, if a pull request adds to the documentation,
it's often useful to let the area maintainers check it for
factual correctness and let documentation maintainers check it
for formatting, style, and grammar.

Make sure that the reviews and approvals were left by people
competent in that specific engine area. It is possible that
even a long-standing member of the Godot organization left
a review without having the relevant expertise. As a merger
you can overrule their approving decision or their requests

> for changes.

Reviewer: AFAIK when possible the people merging should be area maintainers and members of a team maintaining that area. I don't know how strict this is but I know I've seen this mentioned in the past so we should mention it somewhere. The current text here talks about competent-in-the-area people reviewing and then someone else merging.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I don't think that I've made any statement in the article that implies you should review and merge just about anything. But I guess I also didn't make a clear statement that you should focus on issues you yourself are competent at (namely, PRs that await a review from the team you are in).

Throughout the document it is implied that you didn't stumble upon the issue randomly, but were assigned to it via the team you are in.

3. Git checklist
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* **Make sure that the PR comes in one commit.**

  For some cases it may be okay to have it spread across
  several commits, but this is not the case for the majority
  of contributions. If the pull request consists of several
  commits, each commit must be as functional as if other
  commits didn't exist.

* **Fixes made during the review process must be squashed into
  the main commit.**

  For multi-commit PRs check that those fixes are amended in
  the relevant commits, and are not just applied on top of
  everything.

* **Make sure that the PR has no merge conflicts.**

  It must be a one click merge, and if it's not the contributor
  needs to rebase their work from the current master.

* **Check for proper commit attribution.**

  This can primarily happen with new contributors, as they
  often don't provide a correct author signature in their
  commits. This can result in the PR being authored by
  seemingly one person, but submitted for review by another.
  Ultimately, it's up to them if they want it to fix, but such
  PRs won't count towards their contributions to the project
  and will keep them forever "New contributor" as far as our

>   project is concerned.

Reviewer: I think we should specifically mention that this is usually the result of the email in the commit not matching with the email on GitHub.

  is released, the milestone is moved (and the PR itself may
  require a target branch change).

* **Make sure that the opening message of the PR contains the
  magic words "Closes #..." or "Fixes #...".**

  These link the PR and the referenced issue together and allow
  to auto-close the latter when you merge the changes. Note, that
  this only works for the PRs that target the ``master`` branch.
  For others you need to pay attention and close the related
  issues manually. Do it with *"Fixed by #..."* or *"Resolved by #..."*
  comment to clearly indicate the act for future generations.

* **For the issues that get closed by the PR add the closest
  relevant milestone.**

  In other words, if the PR is targeting the ``master``, but is then
  also cherrypicked for ``3.x``, the next ``3.x`` release would be the
  appropriate milestone for the issue.

5. Don't be afraid
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

That's the beauty of version control systems — you can always
revert, go back to a previous commit that was working. We use
Git, so you shouldn't be afraid to merge good pull requests
out of concerns that it may be a mistake. It can, but it's not

> a problem and nobody is going to judge you for it.

Reviewer: We should mention something about while people shouldn't be afraid, they should also be confident about their decision. Reverting is always an option, but I think it's better if we don't have to because a merged change is very likely to be good so few of them need reverting.

Reviewer 2: That's kind of at odds with what @akien-mga said, so I'm not sure. Of course you should be confident, but one of the points was that people who should already be confident may not be because they are afraid of a revert and critique for making a wrong decision. The idea is to destigmatize the chance to make a mistake.

  alright, but often bugs that you can find along the way are better
  left for their own PRs.

* **Code properly uses Godot's own APIs and patterns.**

  This is true for any reasonably sized project — consistency is very
  important, and a solution that already exists in the codebase
  is preferable to an ad-hoc solution.

* **Are core areas affected by the change?**

  Sometimes a PR that is supposed to solve a local problem can have a
  far-reaching effect, way outside of its scope. If you believe that
  is the case, make sure to get senior maintainers involved in the
  process, namely `reduz <https://github.com/reduz>`_ or
  `vnen <https://github.com/vnen>`_. Their input and approval would
  be required for changes to the engine's core systems and overall
  architecture, APIs that touch on all Objects or Nodes, changes
  to GDScript and GDNative. If the pull request modifies the build
  system, you can contact `Akien <https://github.com/akien-mga>`_.

5. Iterate with the contributor and improve the PR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inevitably, a lot of pull requests would be initially undercooked.

> At this point, you and the contributor should enter a feedback loop
> where they iterate on your notes, recommendations and requests, and
> you look that they have indeed fixed the issues you've highlighted.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At this point, you and the contributor should enter a feedback loop
where they iterate on your notes, recommendations, and requests so
you can make sure that they have indeed fixed the issues you've 
highlighted.
```

Try not to exhaust the contributor with style nitpicks, especially
if it's still up in the air whether their PR would be accepted at
all. Preferably, suggestions should come in order of importance:

> first address their overall code design and approach to solving the
> problem, then make sure their code is complying with the engine's
> best practices, and last do the "pretty pass".

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
firstly, address their overall code design and approach to solving the
problem, then make sure their code is complying with the engine's
best practices, and lastly, do the "pretty pass".
```

Some areas of the engine are more important than others. There is
a lot of ugly code in the editor and UI components, and while this
is not ideal, it's not the end of the world either. It's fine to
suggest improvements there as well, but don't insist too much if
the end result is achieved and the contribution leaves the code
reasonably maintainable.

And ultimately, don't feel pressured to deal with the PR all
alone. Feel free to ask for a helping hand on the `Godot
Contributors Chat <https://chat.godotengine.org>`_, in the appropriate
channel or in general. Other teams may already be tagged for review,
so you can also wait or ask for their assistance.

6. Approve the pull request
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If you find that everything is in order, that the PR is addressing
> a problem and does so in the acceptable way (it doesn't have to be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you find that everything is in order and that the PR is addressing
a problem in an acceptable way (it doesn't have to be
```

Reviewer 2: This changes the accents in the point that is being made. Why do you want to change it?

Reviewer 5: May have misread it, and reading this part again, it seems that a semicolon would work better since as of right now it reads as if the things "you find" are being listed here (i.e. everything in order, addressing problem, and in an acceptable way).

```suggestion
If you find that everything is in order; that the PR is addressing
a problem and does so in the acceptable way (it doesn't have to be
```

Reviewer 2: Well, there are two things listed here, which are related to "you find":
* that everything is in order;
* that the PR is addressing a problem and does so in the acceptable way.

Is that not clear from my phrasing and punctuation? Would this change help?

```suggestion
If you find that everything is in order, that the PR is addressing
a problem, and that it does so in the acceptable way (it doesn't have to be
```

Reviewer 5: Yeah, that change should work.

2. Get feedback from the community
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Not all areas of the engine have a lot of maintainers, so
don't shy away from asking the involved users to help (namely,
the reporter of the bug or the submitter of the proposal).
Even if they cannot validate the code, they can still test the
changes with their projects and report back the results.

If you know of a contributor who has recently worked in the
area, you can also ask them to give it a look. Consider this
both help with the PR and an act of indoctrination into our
team.

3. Git checklist
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* **Make sure that the PR comes in one commit.**

  For some cases it may be okay to have it spread across
  several commits, but this is not the case for the majority
  of contributions. If the pull request consists of several
  commits, each commit must be as functional as if other
  commits didn't exist.

* **Fixes made during the review process must be squashed into
  the main commit.**

  For multi-commit PRs check that those fixes are amended in
  the relevant commits, and are not just applied on top of
  everything.

* **Make sure that the PR has no merge conflicts.**

>   It must be a one click merge, and if it's not the contributor

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  It must be a one click merge, and if it's not, the contributor
```

  most pull requests must be made against it, and can then be
  backported to other branches. Be wary of people making PRs
  on the version they are working on (e.g, ``3.3``) and guide
  them to make a change against a higher-order branch. If the
  change doesn't make sense for the ``master``, the initial PR can
  be made against the current maintenance branch, such as ``3.x``.
  It's okay for people to make multiple PRs for each target
  branch, especially if the changes cannot be easily backported.
  Cherry-picking is also an option, if possible. Use the appropriate
  labels if the PR can be cherrypicked (e.g. ``cherrypick:3.x``).

.. note::

    It is possible to change the target branch of the PR,
    that has already been submitted, but be aware of the
    consequences. As it cannot be synchronized with the push,
    the target branch change will inevitable tag the entire
    list of maintainers for review. It may also render the
    CI incapable of running properly. A push should help with
    that, but if nothing else, recommend opening a new, fresh PR.

* **Make sure that the appropriate milestone is assigned.**

>   This will make it more obvious which version would include the
>   submitted changes, should the pull request be merged now.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  This will make it more obvious which version would include the
  submitted changes, and if the pull request should be merged now.
```

Reviewer 2: This is not correct, the phrase here means "Should the pull request be merged now, it will be included in this version".

  Note, that the milestone is not a binding contract and does
  not guarantee that this version is definitely going to include
  the PR. If the pull request is not merged before the version
  is released, the milestone is moved (and the PR itself may
  require a target branch change).

* **Make sure that the opening message of the PR contains the
  magic words "Closes #..." or "Fixes #...".**

  These link the PR and the referenced issue together and allow
  to auto-close the latter when you merge the changes. Note, that
  this only works for the PRs that target the ``master`` branch.
  For others you need to pay attention and close the related
  issues manually. Do it with *"Fixed by #..."* or *"Resolved by #..."*
  comment to clearly indicate the act for future generations.

* **For the issues that get closed by the PR add the closest
  relevant milestone.**

  In other words, if the PR is targeting the ``master``, but is then
  also cherrypicked for ``3.x``, the next ``3.x`` release would be the
  appropriate milestone for the issue.

5. Don't be afraid
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> That's the beauty of version control systems — you can always
> revert, go back to a previous commit that was working. We use

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
That's the beauty of version control systems — you can always
revert and go back to a previous commit that was working. We use
```

Reviewer 2: That's not a sequence of events, that's a rhetorical repetition.
